(page 2)
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors appreciate this opportunity to express thanks to all loyal
friends and students for their sustained encouragement which cheered
them onward in the preparation of this book. Special gratitude is
acknowledged to Beatrice E. Rogers for most valuable assistance
rendered, and to George Hoyningen-Huene for his unusual patience
and exceptional professional skill in the production of the fine pho-
tography illustrating the technical text throughout RETURN TO LIFE.

(page 3)
INTRODUCTION
fViORTAL perfection is achievable only through bodily perfection;
and therefore the development of physique to high levels of strength
and beauty, under control of the mind. This is the first requisite of
human achievement. Also the maintenance of a superior standard
of physical fitness is increasingly necessary to the maintenance of life
and liberty in any complex civilization. It is supremely so in times of
social strife. Therefore, the discovery and use of the most efficient
programs of physical improvement are now vital to the very preserva-
tion of the race.
In my judgment, Contrology is an ideal system to transform the body
into a perfect instrument of the will. It is kinesiologically proper,
physiologically sound, psychologically correct. I have personal knowl-
edge of its success in effecting astonishing results, not only for normal
adults but also for those suffering from supposedly incurable physical
defects and organic deficiencies.
For twenty years I have studied professionally the leading systems
of body development proposed and used in schools, colleges, private
gymnasia, and other institutions, and have no hesitation in saying that
the Pilates system is not merely 20 or 50 or 80 per cent more efficient,
but must be several times as effective as any practicable combination
of other systems.
To appreciate the truth of this statement the reader must himself
have experimented with other systems, and then must have actually
used Contrology. For it develops not only the muscles of the body,
suppleness of the limbs, and functioning of vital organs and endocrine
glands; it also clarifies the mind and develops the will.
So it is with great pleasure that I endorse Joseph H. Pilates' work,
and hope it will spread throughout our country, bringing increased
physical fitness to all.
Frederick Rand Rogers
President
North American Physical Fitness Institute

(page 6)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS OF A
NATURAL PHYSICAL EDUCATION
CIVILIZATION IMPAIRS PHYSICAL FITNESS
Physical fitness is the first requisite of happiness. Our interpretation
of physical fitness is the attainment and maintenance of a uniformly
developed body with a sound mind fully capable of naturally, easily,
and satisfactorily performing our many and varied daily tasks with
spontaneous zest and pleasure. To achieve the highest accomplish-
ments within the scope of our capabilities in all walks of life we must
constantly strive to acquire strong, healthy bodies and develop our
minds to the limit of our ability. This very rapidly progressing world
with its ever-increasing faster tempo of living demands that we be
physically fit and alert in order that we may succeed in the unceasing
race with keen competition which rewards the "go-getter" but by-
passes the "no-getter." Physical fitness can neither be acquired by
wishful thinking nor by outright purchase. However, it can be gained
through performing the daily exercises conceived for this purpose by
the founder of Contrology whose unique methods accomplish this
desirable result by successfully counteracting the harmful inherent
conditions associated with modern civilization.
In the Stone Age and onward man lived mostly outdoors with prac-
tically little shelter from the elements. He has not yet lived long
enough indoors with protection against the elements to be able to
successfully withstand the daily strains and stresses imposed upon him
by our present mode of "fast" living. This explains why both you and
I and all the rest of us are compelled in our own interest to give constant
thought to the improvement of our bodies and to spend more time in
acquiring and maintaining that all-important goal of physical fitness.
All in all, we do not give our bodies the care that our wellbeing
deserves. True, we do stroll in the fresh air whenever our whimsical
spirit moves us, or whenever necessity compels us to do so, with the
result that on these occasions we do, in spite of ourselves, exercise our
legs to this limited extent, accomplished, however, at the sacrifice of
the rest of our body which after all is much more important to us from
the viewpoint of our general health. Is it any wonder then that this
haphazard and wholly inadequate body-building technique of the

(page 7)
RETURN TO LIFE
average person fails so miserably in the acquirement of physical
fitness!
Admittedly, it is rather difficult to gain ideal physical fitness under
the handicap of daily breathing the soot-saturated air of our crowded
and noisy cities. On the other hand, we can more quickly realize this
ambition if we are privileged to breathe the pure fresh air of the
country and forests without the accompaniment of the traffic roar of
the city which constantly tends to keep our nerves strung taut. Even
those of us who work in the city and are fortunate enough to live in
the country must counteract the unnatural physical fatigue and mental
strain experienced in our daily activities. Telephones, automobiles,
and economic pressure all combine to create physical letdown and
mental stress so great that today practically no home is entirely free
from sufferers of some form of nervous tension.
Because of the intense concentration demanded by our work and
despite the real enjoyment our work may bring some of us we, never-
theless, gladly welcome any additional relief in the form of diversified
and pleasant recreational activities, preferably outdoors, in our con-
stant attempts to offset the effects of increasing cares and burdens so
common today. To ease mental strain and relieve physical fatigue we
must acquire a reserve stockpile of nervous energy in order that we
may really be able to enjoy ourselves at night. Hobbies and all forms
of play tend materially to renew our vitality with accompanying moral
uplift. Play is not necessarily only confined to indulging in conven-
tional games. Rather the term "play" as we use it here, embraces
every possible form of PLEASURABLE LIVING. For example, simply
spending a quiet and pleasant evening at home with our family
chatting with congenial friends is, according to our interpretation, a
form of play; that is, delightful, pleasant social entertainment as
distinguished from our daily work. This finds us cheerful, contented,
and relaxed.
However, many of us at the end of our daily work lack sufficient
energy at night for recreation. How many of us simply spend the night
routinely reading the evening newspaper? How many of us are
entirely too exhausted to read, even occasionally, an interesting book,
visit our friends, or see one of the latest motion pictures? When some
of us occasionally spend a weekend away from our usual city haunts
and environments, instead of receiving the immediate benefits of that
desirable change in the way of complete revitalization (without
fatigue) as the result of our experience outdoors in the bright sunshine,
we are more often than not likely to find ourselves only recovering

(page 8)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
from the shock of our disappointment about the middle of the follow-
ing week. Why? Because our previous mode of living and the conse-
quent neglect of our bodies has not prepared us for reaping the
beneficial results of this diversion. We lacked the necessary reserve
energy to draw upon for this purpose and the fault lies only with us
and not with nature as most of us like to think. All that any normal
body should require is a change —from whatever it has previously
been subjected to.
Accordingly, since we are living in this Modern Age we must of
necessity devote more time and more thought to the important matter
of acquiring physical fitness. This does not necessarily imply that we
must devote ourselves only to the mere development of any particular
pet set of muscles, but rather more rationally to the uniform develop-
ment of our bodies as a whole—keeping all our organs as nearly as
possible in their naturally normal condition so that we may not only
be in a better position to earn our daily bread but also so that we
may have sufficient vitality in reserve at night for the enjoyment of
compensating pleasure and relaxation.
Perhaps with some feeling of doubt you ask, "How can I realize
such a Utopian condition? At night I am much too tired to go to a
gymnasium." Or, "Isn't it too costly to enroll for a conditioning course
in some good gymnasium or club?" RETURN TO LIFE fully explains
how you can successfully achieve your worthy ambition to attain
physical fitness right in your own home and at only nominal cost.
CONTROLOGY RESTORES PHYSICAL FITNESS
Contrology is complete coordination of body, mind, and spirit.
Through Contrology you first purposefully acquire complete control
of your own body and then through proper repetition of its exercises
you gradually and progressively acquire that natural rhythm and
coordination associated with all your subconscious activities. This true
rhythm and control is observed both in domestic pets and wild animals
—without known exceptions.
Contrology develops the body uniformly, corrects wrong postures,
restores physical vitality, invigorates the mind, and elevates the spirit.
In childhood, with rare exceptions, we all enjoy the benefits of natural
and normal physical development. However, as we mature, we find
ourselves living in bodies not always complimentary to our ego. Our
bodies are slumped, our shoulders are stooped, our eyes are hollow,
our muscles are flabby, and our vitality extremely lowered, if not

(page 9)
RETURN TO LIFE
vanished. This is but the natural result of not having uniformly devel-
oped all the muscles of our spine, trunk, arms, and legs in the course
of pursuing our daily labors and office activities.
If you will faithfully perform your Contrology exercises regularly
only four times a week for just three months as outlined in RETURN
TO LIFE, you will find your body development approaching the ideal,
accompanied by renewed mental vigor and spiritual enhancement.
Contrology is designed to give you suppleness, natural grace, and
skill that will be unmistakably reflected in the way you walk, in the
way you play, and in the way you work. You will develop muscular
power with corresponding endurance, ability to perform arduous
duties, to play strenuous games, to walk, run or travel for long dis-
tances without undue body fatigue or mental strain. And this by no
means is the end.
One of the major results of Contrology is gaining the mastery of
your mind over the complete control of your body. How many begin-
ners are amazed and chagrined (even trained athletes in the public
eye) to discover how few (if any) Contrology exercises they are able
to execute properly! Their previous failure to exercise regularly and
properly, or their method of training, has not helped them. There is
unmistakable evidence, too, that the functioning of the brain has
correspondingly deteriorated. The brain itself is actually a sort of
natural telephone switchboard exchange incorporated in our bodies
as a means of communication through the sympathetic nervous system
to all our muscles. Unfortunately, pure reason plays only a minor part
in the lives of most of us. In practically every instance the daily acts
we perform are governed by what we THINK we see, hear, or
touch, without stopping first to analyze or think of the possible results
of our actions, good or bad. As the result of habit or reflex action,
we wink, dodge, and operate machines more or less automatically.
IDEALLY, OUR MUSCLES SHOULD OBEY OUR WILL. REASONABLY,
OUR WILL SHOULD NOT BE DOMINATED BY THE REFLEX ACTIONS
OF OUR MUSCLES. When brain cells are developed, the mind too is
developed. Teachers start with sense organs. Contrology begins with
mind control over muscles.
By reawakening thousands and thousands of otherwise ordinarily
dormant muscle cells, Contrology correspondingly reawakens thou-
sands and thousands of dormant brail* cells, thus activating new areas
and stimulating further the functioning of the mind. No wonder then
that so many persons express such great surprise following their
initial experience with Contrology exercises caused by their realiza-

(page 10)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
tion of the resulting sensation of "uplift." For the first time in many
years their minds have been truly awakened. Continued use of
Contrology steadily increases the normal and natural supply of pure
rich blood to flow to and circulate throughout the brain with corre-
sponding stimulation to new brain areas previously dormant. More
significantly, it actually develops more brain cells. G. Stanley Hall,
the great American psychologist, observed: "The culture of muscles
is brain-building."
GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF CONTROLOGY
Contrology is not a fatiguing system of dull, boring, abhorred
exercises repeated daily "ad nauseum." Neither does it demand your
joining a gymnasium nor the purchasing of expensive apparatus.
You may derive all the benefits of Contrology in your own home.
The only unchanging rules you must conscientiously obey is that you
must always faithfully and without deviation follow the instructions
accompanying the exercises and always keep your mind wholly
concentrated on the purpose of the exercises as you perform them.
This is vitally important in order for you to gain the results sought,
otherwise, there would be no valid reason for your interest in Con-
trology. Moreover, you must accept all collateral advice with equal
fidelity. Remember that you are teaching yourself—right! The bene-
fits of Contrology depend solely upon your performing the exercises
exactly according to instructions—and not otherwise.
Remember, too, that "Rome was not built in a day," and that
PATIENCE and PERSISTENCE are vital qualities in the ultimate suc-
cessful accomplishment of any worthwhile endeavor. Practice your
exercises diligently with the fixed and unalterable determination that
you will permit nothing else to sway you from keeping faith with
yourself. At times you may feel tempted to "take a night off." Don't
succumb to this momentary weakness of indecision, or rather, wrong
decision. Decide to remain true to yourself. Think of what would
happen if the stokers firing the boilers of a giant oceanliner were to
decide to "take a night off." You know the answer. If they were to
repeat this action, you know the result. The human body, fortunately,
can withstand more neglect, successfully, than can the complicated
machinery of a modern steamship. However, that is no good reason
why we should unnecessarily and unreasonably tax our bodies beyond
bounds of endurance, especially since doing so results only in hurting
ourselves. Schopenhauer, the philosopher, said: "To neglect one's
body for any other advantage in life is the greatest of follies."

(page 11)
RETURN TO LIFE
Make up your mind that you will perform your Contrology exercise
ten minutes without fail. Amazingly enough, once you travel on this
Contrology "Road to Health" you will subconsciously lengthen your
trips on it from ten to twenty or more minutes before you even realize
it. Why? The answer is simple: The exercises have stirred your slug-
gish circulation into action and to performing its duty more effectively
in the matter of discharging through the bloodstream the accumulation
of fatigue-products created by muscular and mental activities. Your
brain clears and your will power functions.
BODILY HOUSE-CLEANING WITH BLOOD CIRCULATION
This is the equivalent of an "internal shower." As the spring freshets
born of the heavy rains and vast masses of melting snows on mountains
in the hinterlands cause rivers to swell and rush turbulently onward to
the sea, so, too, will your blood flow with renewed vigor as the direct
result of your faithfully performing the Contrology exercises. These
exercises induce the heart to pump strong and steadily with the result
that the bloodstream is forced to carry and discharge more and more
of the accumulated debris created by fatigue. Contrology exercises
drive the pure fresh blood to every muscle fibre of our bodies, par-
ticularly to the very important capillaries which ordinarily are rarely
ever fully stimulated once we have reached adulthood. As a heavy
rainstorm freshens the water of a sluggish or stagnant stream and
whips it into immediate action, so Contrology exercises purify the
blood in the bloodstream and whip it into instant action with the
result that the organs of the body, including the important sweat
glands, receive the benefit of clean fresh blood carried to them by the
rejuvenated bloodstream. Observe the beneficial effects that Con-
trology exercises have on your heart action.
Contrology exercises guard against unnecessary pounding or throb-
bing of your heart. Study carefully the poses illustrated by the photo-
graphs and note that all the exercises are performed while you are
in a sitting or reclining position. This is done to relieve your heart
from undue strain as well as to take advantage of the more normal
(original) position of the visceral organs of your body when in such
positions. Contrary to exercises performed in an upright position,
those performed while you are in a recumbent position do not aggra-
vate any possible undetected organic weakness.
True heart control follows correct breathing which simultaneously
reduces heart strain, purifies the blood, and develops the lungs. To

(page 12)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
breathe correctly you must completely exhale and inhale, always
trying very hard to "squeeze" every atom of impure air from your
lungs in much the same manner that you would wring every drop of
water from a wet cloth. When you stand erect again, the lungs will
automatically completely refill themselves with fresh air. This in turn
supplies the bloodstream with vitally necessary life-giving oxygen.
Also the complete exhalation and inhalation of air stimulates all
muscles into greater activity. Soon the entire body is abundantly
charged with fresh oxygen, a fact which makes itself instantly known
as the revitalized blood reaches the tips of your fingers and toes
similarly as the heat generated by a good head of steam in your
boiler and properly distributed by your radiators is felt in every room
in your house.
Breathing is the first act of life, and the last. Our very life depends
on it. Since we cannot live without breathing, it is tragically deplor-
able to contemplate the millions and millions who have never learned
to master the art of correct breathing. One often wonders how so
many millions continue to live as long as they do under this tremendous
handicap to longevity. Lazy breathing converts the lungs, figuratively
speaking, into a cemetery for the deposition of diseased, dying, and
dead germs as well as supplying an ideal haven for the multiplication
of other harmful germs. Therefore, above all, learn how to breathe
correctly. "SQUEEZE" EVERY ATOM OF AIR FROM YOUR LUNGS
UNTIL THEY ARE ALMOST AS FREE OF AIR AS IS A VACUUM.
Stand erect again and observe how your lungs will automatically
completely refill themselves with fresh air. The impact of so much
oxygen upon your bloodstream may at first quite naturally and nor-
mally result in your experiencing a slight sensation of "lightheaded-
ness," similar to the effect you might experience were you for the
first time to find yourself actively engaged in the rarefied atmosphere
high up in the mountains. However, after a few days this feeling will
entirely disappear.
Whenever you read the word "rolling" in the exercises, be sure to
hold your chin pressed tightly against your chest and, when you lie
down or when you rise, "roll" and "unroll" your spine exactly in
imitation of a wheel rolling forward and backward. Vertebra by
vertebra try to "roll" and "unroll" as suggested. It is this very action
of "rolling" and "unrolling" that cleanses your lungs so effectively by
driving out the impure air and forcing in the pure air as you "roll"
and "unroll." Indefatigably and conscientiously practice breathing
until the art of correct breathing becomes habitual, automatic and

(page 13)
RETURN TO LIFE
subconscious, which accomplishment will result in the bloodstream
receiving its full quota of oxygen and thus ward off undue fatigue.
Study carefully. Do not sacrifice knowledge to speed in building
your solid exercise regime on the foundation of Contrology. Follow
instructions exactly as indicated down to the very smallest detail.
There IS a reason! Contrology is not a system of haphazard exercises
designed to produce only bulging muscles. Just to the contrary, it was
conceived and tested (for over forty-three years) with the idea of
properly and scientifically exercising every muscle in your body in
order to improve the circulation of the blood so that the bloodstream
can and will carry more and better blood to feed every fibre and tissue
of your body. Nor does Contrology err either by over-developing a
few muscles at the expense of all others with resulting loss of grace
and suppleness, or at a sacrifice of the heart or lungs. Rather, it was
conceived to limber and stretch muscles and ligaments so that your
body will be as supple as that of a cat and not muscular like that of
the body of a brewery-truck horse, or the muscle-bound body of the
professional weight-lifter you so much admire in the circus.
Concentrate on the correct movements EACH TIME YOU EXERCISE,
lest you do them improperly and thus lose all the vital benefits of their
value. Correctly executed and mastered to the point of subconscious
reaction, these exercises will reflect grace and balance in your routine
activities. Contrology exercises build a sturdy body and sound mind
fitted to perform every daily task with ease and perfection as well as
to provide tremendous reserve energy for sports, recreation, emer-
gencies. Very interesting, but quite obvious when you stop to think of
it, is the undisputable fact that no one modern activity employs all our
muscles. The nearest approach to this ideal is found in all-round
swimming and fancy diving. Walking, the only exercise over activity
common to most of us, employs only a limited number of muscles.
With repetition the art of walking becomes a subconscious habit, not
infrequently a bad one, and only too often accompanied by poor
posture—note our letter-carriers.
However, there is another important reason for consistently exer-
cising all our muscles; namely, that each muscle may cooperatively
and loyally aid in the uniform development of ail our muscles. Devel-
oping minor muscles naturally help to strengthen major muscles. As
small bricks are employed to build large buildings, so will the devel-
opment of small muscles help develop large muscles. Therefore, when
10

(page 14)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
all your muscles are properly developed you will, as a matter of
course, perform your work with minimum effort and maximum
pleasure.
On a pleasant sunshiny morning, how we all naturally thrill in
anticipation of accompanying congenial friends on a trip over modern
highways to the country in a perfect-running automobile with a good
driver at the wheel, knowing that his gradual acceleration and decel-
eration and his skillful negotiation of even sharp curves and abrupt
turns are all accomplished so smoothly that we never give a conscious
thought to his fine driving but rather concentrate on enjoying the
passing scenery. How different, however, our reactions when taking
a similar ride in a neglected car driven by a bad driver whose jerky
starts, sudden stops, and dangerous turns not only upset our balance
constantly but also rob us of the pleasure of the trip, especially after
we realize that, luckily for us, he just missed "capsizing" the car
although he did not succeed in avoiding dumping us into the ditch.
With the foregoing examples to guide us, we should wisely select
as our pattern of life in this Modern Age that which excludes constant
pushing, shoving, rushing, crowding, and wild scrambling all so
characteristic of our day. This too fast pace is plainly reflected in
our manner of standing, walking, sitting, eating, and even talking and
results in our nerves "being on edge" from morning to night and
actually depriving us of our needed sleep.
Constantly keep in mind the fact that you are not interested in
merely developing bulging muscles but rather flexible ones. Bulging
muscles hinder the attainment of flexibility because the over-devel-
oped muscles interfere with the proper development of the under-
developed muscles. True flexibility can be achieved only when all
muscles are uniformly developed. Normal muscles should function
naturally in much the same manner as do the muscles of animals. For
instance, at the very next opportunity, watch a cat as it lazily opens
its eyes, slowly looks around, and gradually prepares to rise after a
nap. First, it gradually rises on its hindquarters and then gradually
lowers itself again, at the same time sprawling out on the floor,
leisurely stretching its forepaws (with extended claws) and legs.
Observe closely how all its back muscles actually ripple as it stretches
and relaxes itself. Cats as well as other animals acquire this ideal
rhythm of motion because they are constantly stretching and relaxing
themselves, sharpening their claws, twisting, squirming, turning,
climbing, wrestling, and fighting. Also observe, too, how cats sleep-
utterly relaxed whether they happen to be lying on their back, side
11

(page 15)
RETURN TO LIFE
or belly. Contrology exercises emphasize the need for this constant
stretching and relaxing.
Before proceeding, we must speak of the spinal column with which
are associated practically all the major activities of our body. The
spine is composed of 26 vertebrae. Each vertebra is separated from
the other by intervertebral cartilage. This cartilage acts as a cushion
to absorb the shock of sudden jars, reduces fricfion to a minimum, and
gives the spine its characteristic flexibility, thus permitting it to func-
tion even more freely. The science of Contrology disproves that
prevalent and all-too-trite saying, "You're only as old as you feel."
The art of Contrology proves that the only real guide to your true age
lies not in years or how you THINK you feel but as you ACTUALLY
are as infallibly indicated by the degree of natural and normal flexi-
bility enjoyed by your spine throughout life. If your spine is inflexibly
stiff at 30, you are old; if it is completely flexible at 60, you are young.
Because of poor posture, practically 95 per cent of our population
suffers from varying degrees of spinal curvature, not to mention more
serious ailments. In a newly-born infant the back is flat because the
spine is straight. Of course, we all know that this is exactly as intended
by nature not only then but also throughout life. However, this ideal
condition rarely obtains in adult life. When the spine curves, the
entire body is thrown out of its natural alignment—off balance. Note
daily the thousands of persons with round, stooped shoulders, and
protruding abdomens. The back would be flat if the spine were kept
as straight as a plumb line, and its flexibility would be comparable to
that of the finest watch spring steel.
Fortunately, the spine lends itself quite readily to correction. There-
fore, in the reclining exercises, be sure wherever indicated, to keep
your back full length always pressed firmly against the mat or floor.
When rising from the floor or lowering yourself to the floor, always
do so with a "rolling" or "unrolling" motion exactly in imitation of a
wheel, equipped with imaginary "vertebrae" rolling forward or back-
ward. Vertebra by vertebra try to "roll" and "unroll." These "rolling"
and "unrolling" movements tend to gradually but surely restore the
spine to its normal at-birth position with its correspondingly increased
flexibility. At the same time you are completely emptying and refilling
your lungs to their full capacity. This admittedly requires persistence
and earnest effort but—it is worth it!
It would be a grave error to assume that even Contrology exercises
alone will remake a man or a woman into an entirely physically fit
person. To understand this statement better, just remember that exer-
12

(page 16)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
cises as such with relation to physical fitness are somewhat similar to
the relationship a grindstone or hone bears to an axe or razor. For
example, how obvious is the answer to the foolish question as to which
of two equally expert woodchoppers would cry "Timber" first, the
one with a dull axe or saw, or the one who habitually sharpens his
tools nightly in preparation for his work the next day. Correspond-
ingly, proper diet and sufficient sleep must supplement our exercise
in our quest for physical fitness. Another important factor in this con-
nection is that of relaxation at stated fixed intervals throughout our
workday wherever it is possible to do so, since this practice keeps us
physically fit after we have obtained physical fitness. The man who
uses intelligence with respect to his diet, his sleeping habits, and
who exercises properly, is beyond any question of doubt taking the
very best preventive medicines provided so freely and abundantly
by nature.
By all means never fail to get all the sunshine and fresh air that you
can. Remember too, that your body also "breathes" through the pores
of your skin as well as through your mouth, nose, and lungs. Clean,
open skin pores permit perspiration to uninterruptedly eliminate the
poisons of your body. Moreover, unless you are really chilly, do not
exercise in sweatshirts or even in lighter clothing. Whenever and
wherever possible, wear "shorts" or sunsuits outdoors, and let the
lifegiving ultraviolet rays reach and penetrate into every skin pore
of your body. Do not fear the cold of winter. When you are outdoors
wear rather loose-fitting clothes in preference to tight-fitting gar-
ments, not overlooking, of course, the importance of stout, comfortable
shoes. Breathe properly, walk correctly, and swing along briskly. If
you follow this sound advice you will find yourself feeling comfortable
and invigorated.
The principal point to remember with regard to diet is to eat only
enough food to restore the "fuel" consumed by the body and to keep
enough of it on hand at all times to furnish the extra energy required
on occasions beyond our normal needs and to meet unexpected
emergencies. Merely eating to satisfy one's lust for good food is both
foolish and dangerous to one's health. Such a person cannot ever
be truly physically fit. No wonder! Youth and growing children quite
naturally require a greater intake of food than do adults and the
aged. The former are maturing; the latter have matured.
Not only the amount of food but also the kind is largely dependent
upon one's occupation and sometimes, lack of it. Is it not reasonable
to conclude that the sedentary indoor worker requires proportionately
13

(page 17)
RETURN TO LIFE
less food and of a different kind than the laborer who is engaged in
hard manual toil outdoors? Heavy eating followed immediately by
sitting, or even lying down awake or asleep, is comparable to over-
loading the firebox with coal and then closing the drafts of the furnace.
The former instance is ideal for generating "poisons" that eventually
find their way into your bloodstream. The latter instance is ideal if
your aim is to maintain a smoldering fire without adequate heat
instead of a bright, glowing fire to radiate its comforting warmth
throughout your house. You have the choice in either case. Common
sense dictates that you will make the right one. A man eating a heavy
meal and indulging in vigorous activity will react thereto comparably
to the way that a furnace with drafts open will react to a fire in a
well-filled firebox. Accordingly, it is earnestly suggested that you
guide your eating habits with all due respect to the required amount
of food and kind you need to keep yourself physically fit, always as
indicated by your occupation, or lack of it.
Often men who have been accustomed to work hard on a farm or
play hard in school athletics or labor hard in a factory, continue
eating the hearty meals they then ate even though now they are
engaged only in sedentary indoor occupations where moderate meals
are indicated. This practice is very unwise since it unnecessarily adds
excess weight to their bodies, much of it in the form of undesirable
fat which, if man were»a hibernator, he could draw on in much the
same manner that hibernating animals do in the winter when they
draw against the stockpile of reserved energy with which the instinct
of nature has provided them over the long period of their enforced
inactivity and "sleep." Since man is not a hibernating creature, such
excess of fat is a real detriment to him, imposing an unnecessarily
heavy burden on his heart, liver, bladder and other vitally important
organs of his digestive system. Still worse for him is the unnatural
formation and accumulation of fat directly around the heart itself.
The carrying of this extra poundage produces needless fatigue.
Imagine yourself, for instance, carrying a well-filled traveling bag
weighing 20 pounds. For one or two blocks, all goes comparatively
well, but with each additional block it is carried the urge to rest is
proportionately increased until at length the resulting fatigue compels
you to do so. How relieved you feel after you have reached your
final destination! You are doing exactly the very same thing when
you persist in carrying 20 needless pounds of excess weight on your
body only you are not so keenly aware of it because the weight is
carried by the entire body instead of by your carrying arm alone as
14

(page 18)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
in the case of the bag. However, fatigue is created thereby in either
case. Why not relieve yourself of this truly "excess baggage?"
Once acquired, it is, unfortunately, not so easy to rid yourself of
excess weight. Nevertheless, it can be done! Consult your family
physician for regular physical check-ups, and then follow his sound
advice and instructions implicitly. Every adult over 40 years of age
should not deny himself the benefits of a medical examination every
three months. Once a year should suffice for younger persons unless
some condition indicates to the contrary. Even in their case, consult-
ing their physician twice a year would be wise. If this sound sugges-
tion is followed, latent ailments can be discovered in their early
developmental stage, and the "growth" of a long and perhaps serious
illness may thus be "nipped in the bud."
If any particular part of your body is under-developed or shows
an accumulation of excess fat, select Contrology exercises specifically
designed to correct the respective conditions, repeating the exercises
at stated intervals throughout the workday whenever it is possible to
do so. However, be sure NEVER TO REPEAT THE SELECTED EXER-
CISER) MORE THAN THE PRESCRIBED NUMBER OF TIMES since
more harm will result than good by your unwittingly or intentionally
disregarding this most important advice and direction. Why? Be-
cause this infraction creates muscular fatigue—poison. There is really
no need for tired muscles. Judicious selection of special Contrology
exercises will accomplish more for your health and bodily condition,
in conjunction with the foregoing advice, than all else combined.
Now let us consider the important question of good sleep at night.
A quiet, cool, well-ventilated room is best. Do not use a soft mattress.
"Firm but not soft" is a good rule to follow. Use the lightest possible
bed coverings consistent with warmth. Do not use large bulky pillows
(or as some do, two stacked pillows)—better still, use none at all.
Most important in the matter of enjoying good recuperative sleep
are quiet, darkness, fresh air, and mental calm. Nervousness is usually
aggravated by a lack of proper exercise, especially in the case of one
with a troubled mind. The best alleviative for this condition is exercise.
So if your sleep is disturbed, rise immediately and perform your
exercises. It is far better to be tired from physical exertion than to
be fatigued by the "poisons" generated by nervousness while lying
awake. Particularly beneficial in this regard are the spinal "rolling"
and "unrolling" massage exercises which relax the nerves and induce
sound, restful sleep.
While conceding the fact that nowadays practically everyone of us
15

(page 19)
RETURN TO LIFE
routinely indulges in daily baths, experience has nevertheless taught
us that only a small minority really achieve thorough cleanliness
thereby, from our point of view. In our opinion, the correct technique
to use in accomplishing this highly desirable result is to use only a
good stiff brush (no handle) since this type of brush forces us to twist,
squirm, and contort ourselves in every conceivable way in our attempts
to reach every portion of our body which are otherwise comparatively
easy to reach with a handle brush. The use of a good stiff brush as
described stimulates circulation, thoroughly cleans OUT the pores of
the skin, and removes dead skin too. The pores of your skin must
"breathe"—they cannot do so unless they are kept open and freed
from clogging. Your skin will soon respond most gratifyingly to this
perhaps seemingly "Spartan-like" treatment and acquire in the
process a new, fresh, glowing appearance, and develop a texture
smooth and soft to the touch. So brush away merrily, and heartily too!
Finally, beginning with the introductory lesson, each succeeding
exercise should be mastered before proceeding progressively with
the following exercises. Make a close study of each exercise and do
not attempt any other exercise until you first have mastered the
current one and know its routine down to the last detail without any
reference to the text. Be certain that you have your entire body under
complete mental control.
RESULTS OF CONTROLOGY
Good posture can be successfully acquired only when the entire
mechanism of the body is under perfect control. Graceful carriage
follows as a matter of course. Just as a good smooth-running auto-
mobile engine is the result of proper parts correctly assembled so that
it operates with a minimum consumption of gasoline and oil with
comparatively little wear, so too is the proper functioning of your own
body the direct result of the assembled Contrology exercises that
produce a harmonious structure we term physical fitness reflecting
itself in a coordinated and balanced tri-part unity of body, mind, and
spirit. This in turn results in perfect posture when sitting, standing, or
walking with the utilization of approximately only 25 per cent of
your energy while the approximately remaining 75 per cent in the
form of surplus energy reserve is "on call" to meet the needs of any
possible emergency.
The art of correct walking consists principally and simply in a slight
tilting forward of the proper standing posture, alternately placing one
16

(page 20)
THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS
foot before the other with the weight of the body poised and balanced
on the balls of the feet. Be careful not to lock your knees as doing
so will jar the spine and interrupt the rhythmic walking motion.
Standing also is very important and should be practiced at all times
until it is mastered. First, assume the correct posture, then when tired,
shift the weight of the body from one side to the other while resting
on the "idle" side. Do not push your hips out or lock your knees.
Progress forward with a slightly swaying graceful motion comparable
to the effect created by a gentle breeze blowing over a field of grow-
ing wheat ready for harvest, causing it to gracefully sway in "waves"
from its roots to its tips. Never slouch, as doing so compresses the
lungs, overcrowds other vital organs, rounds the back, and throws
you off the balance created by poising the weight of your body on
the balls of your feet.
If you will faithfully follow the instructions, beginning with the
introductory lesson, you will without doubt acquire correct physical
fitness with proper mental control. You will truly be building upon the
solid foundation of Contrology which itself is built upon scientific
principles so true, sound and unique that the science and art of
Contrology will live forever. As you progress in your self-instruction,
you never have anything to "unlearn." These exercises will actually
become a part of your very self securely stored away forever in your
subconscious mind. You who have learned correctly how to ride a
bicycle, how to swim, or how to drive an automobile need never worry
with respect to the possibility of your failing to use the right technique
in these skills on all occasions because of the confidence born of the
fact that you realize you received your instructions from the best
available source and authority. So, too, the acquirement and prac-
tice of the art and science of Contrology will instill that confidence in
you that will remain forever for future use as occasions therefor may
indicate. Then it is simply only a question of "re-toning" the muscles
that have in the meantime become "soft" as the result of disuse.
With body, mind, and spirit functioning perfectly as a coordinated
whole, what else could reasonably be expected other than an active,
alert, disciplined person? Moreover, such a body freed from nervous
tension and over-fatigue is the ideal shelter provided by nature for
housing a well-balanced mind that is always fully capable of success-
fully meeting all the complex problems of modern living. Personal
problems are clearly thought out and calmly met.
The acquirement and enjoyment of physical wellbeing, mental calm,
and spiritual peace are priceless to their possessors if there be any
17

(page 21)
RETURN TO LIFE
such so fortunate living among us today. However, it is the ideal to
strive for, and in our opinion, it is only through Contrology that this
unique trinity of a balanced body, mind, and spirit can ever be
attained. Self - confidence follows. The ancient Athenians wisely
adopted as their own the Roman motto: "Mens sana in corpore sano"
(A sane mind in a sound body). And the Greeks as a people displayed
even greater wisdom when they practiced what they preached and
thus came nearest to achieving its actual accomplishment. Self-confi-
dence, poise, consciousness of possessing the power to accomplish our
desires, with renewed lively interest in life are the natural results of
the practice of Contrology. Thus we achieve happiness, for is not
real happiness truly born of the realization of worthwhile work well
done, with the gratification of enjoying the other pleasures flowing
from successful accomplishment with its compensating measure of
"play" and resulting relaxation?
So in your very commendable pursuit of all that is implied in the
trinity of godlike attributes that only Contrology can offer you, we
bid you not goodbye but "au revoir" firmly linked with the sincere wish
that your efforts will result in well-merited success chained to ever-
lasting happiness for you and yours.
18

(page 22)
THE EXERCISES

(page 23)
I
The Hundred
(Introductory Exercise)

(page 24)
INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Lie flat with body resting on mat or floor
(c) Stretch arms (shoulder-wide, touching body, palms down)
straight forward
(d) Stretch legs (close together, knees locked) straight for-
ward
(e) Stretch toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Lift both feet about 2" above mat or floor
(c) Raise head with eyes focused on toes
(d) Raise both arms about 6" to 8" above thighs
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Raise and lower both arms (tensed)
(c) From shoulders only
(d) Without touching body
(e) Within a radius of 6" to 8"
(f) Mentally counting 5 movements while
(g) EXHALING SLOWLY
(h) Alternating with 5 similar movements while
(i) INHALING SLOWLY
(j) Begin with only 20 movements and
(k) Gradually increase them in units of
(I) 5 additional movements each time until a
(m) Maximum of 100 movements is reached
(n) Never exceed 100 movements
Pose 4 (a) Relax completely
REMARKS
At first you probably will not be able to carry out instructions as illustrated in
poses — this proves why these exercises and all succeeding ones will benefit you.
However, with patience and perseverance you eventually should succeed in
achieving the ideals as posed — with accompanying normal health.
21

II
The Roll Up
i

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Lie flat with entire body resting on mat or floor
(b) Stretch arms (shoulder-wide, palms up) straight back-
ward
(c) Stretch legs (close together, knees locked) straight for-
ward
(d) Stretch toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 2 (a) Begin INHALING SLOWLY and bring arms (shoulder-
wide) straight forward to upright right angle position
and
(b) Toes (pointed) upward
Pose 3 (a) While still INHALING SLOWLY
(b) Bend head forward and downward until
(c) Chin touches chest and then
(d) Begin EXHALING SLOWLY and
(e) Start "rolling" slowly upward and straight forward
Pose 4 (a) While EXHALING SLOWLY finish
(b) "Rolling" forward until
(c) Forehead touches legs and then
(d) Begin INHALING SLOWLY while returning to Pose 3
and Poses 2 and 1
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times, trying with each repetition not only
to stretch the entire body more and more but also to reach farther and farther
straight forward as indicated.
CAUTIONS
Pose 1—Entire spine must touch mat or floor. Tense body (do not bend arms or
legs).
Pose 3 —Press both legs against mat or floor; if at first unsuccessful, placing
cushion on your feet will materially help you.
Pose 4—Legs must remain flat on mat or floor (knees locked). Palms must remain
flat on mat or floor (arms stretched straight forward).
REMARKS
This exercise strengthens the abdominal muscles, and restores the spine to normal.
23

III
The Roll-Over
With Legs Spread
(Both Ways)

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Lie flat on mat or floor
(c) Stretch arms (shoulder-wide, touching body, palms down)
straight forward
(d) Stretch (close together, knees locked) straight forward
(e) Stretch toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY and
(b) Begin raising legs upward and over until
(c) Toes touch mat or floor
(d) EXHALE SLOWLY and
(e) Press arms firmly against mat or floor
(f) (Spread legs as far apart as possible)
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY and
(b) Begin "rolling" slowly downward with
(c) Both legs (tensed) straight (and spread as far apart as
possible)
(d) Until spine touches mat or floor
(e) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(f) Returning to position illustrated in next pose below
(g) With legs about 2" above mat or floor
NOTE
Repeat foregoing exercise five (5) times with legs close together at the start of first
movement and five (5) times with legs spread apart as far as possible at the start
of the second movement.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3 —Keep legs (tensed, knees locked) as far apart as possible. Roll downward
slowly from one vertebra to another.
Pose 4—Keep back and head firmly pressed to mat or floor.
25

IV
The One Leg Circle
(Both Ways)
^i

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Lie flat with entire body resting on mat or floor
(b) Stretch arms (shoulder-wide, touching body, palms down)
straight forward
(c) Bring right leg to upright right angle position
(d) Stretch toes (pointed) forward and downward
(e) Left toes upward
Pose 2 (a) Begin EXHALING SLOWLY at start of downward motion
with right leg while making a complete left-to-right
circle (in the air) over the left thigh, then
(b) Begin INHALING SLOWLY at start of upward motion
with right leg in completing this circle
(c) Begin EXHALING SLOWLY at start of downward motion
with left leg while making a complete right-to-left
circle (in the air) over the right thigh, then
(d) Begin INHALING SLOWLY at start of upward motion
with left leg in completing this circle
Pose 3 (a) Begin INHALING SLOWLY at start of upward motion
and with left leg while making a complete right-to-left
Pose 4 circle (in the air) over the right ankle, then
(b) Begin EXHALING SLOWLY at start of downward motion
with left leg in completing this circle
(c) Begin INHALING SLOWLY at start of upward motion
with right leg while making a complete left-to-right
circle (in the air) over the left ankle, then
(d) Begin EXHALING SLOWLY at start of downward motion
with right leg in completing this circle
Repeat the foregoing exercise five (5) times with each leg.
NOTE
CAUTIONS
Pose 1—Toes must be pointed forward and downward (knee locked), right leg.
Keep left leg (knee locked) flat on mat or floor with toes "pulled" upward and
backward. Shoulders and head must always remain flat on mat or floor.
Pose 2—Same as Pose 1 but note that right hip is raised.
Pose 4—Same as Pose 2 but note that left hip is raised. "Swing" left and right
legs as far as possible when making circles. Shoulders and head must always
remain flat on mat or floor.
27

V
Rolling Back

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) Grasp legs tightly with locked arms
(b) Try to press thighs to chest
(c) Bend head forward and downward with chin touching
chest
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(e) INHALE SLOWLY
(f) "Rock" backward to Pose 3 position
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(b) Returning to Pose 2 position
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Press chest in, round back, head down; keep feet off mat or floor.
29

^M w
VI
The One Leg Stretch

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Lie flat with entire body resting on mat or floor
Pose 2 (a) Bend head forward until
(b) Chin touches chest, then while INHALING SLOWLY
(c) Clasp hands and
(d) "Pull" right leg as far as possible toward chest
(e) Keep left leg stretched forward (knee locked)
(f) Stretch toes (pointed) forward and downward with
(g) Heel raised (about 2")
Pose 3 (a) While EXHALING SLOWLY
(b) Clasp hands and
(c) "Pull" left leg as far as possible toward chest
(d) Keep right leg stretched forward (knee locked)
(e) Stretch toes (pointed) forward and downward with
(f) Heel raised (about 2")
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise five (5) times with each leg. (Later on the number
of repetitions may be gradually and progressively safely increased to twelve (12)
times with each leg.)
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Chin must touch chest. You must see your toes. Heels must be raised
(about 2").
*"■
31

\^
VII
The Double
Leg Stretch

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Rest entire body on mat or floor
(c) Legs (close together) straight forward
(d) Knees locked
(e) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(f) Arms stretched straight forward beside body
(g) Palms down
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Head up
(c) Chin to chest
(d) Arms stretched straight forward and
(e) Pressed firmly against thighs
(f) Heels raised about 2" off mat or floor
(g) Palms inward
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) "Draw" both legs upward and forward and with
(c) Locked wrists hold them firmly in "doubled-up" position
as indicated
(d) "Pull" legs toward you and press them firmly against chest
Pose 4 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times. Later to twelve (12).
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Head pressed firmly against chest. Abdomen in. Heels raised about
2" off mat or floor.
33

^"""—
VIII
The Spine Stretch

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Spread legs as wide apart as possible
(c) "Draw" toes (pointed) upward and backward
Pose 2 (a) Rest palms flat on mat or floor, then with
(b) Outstretched arms, palms flat on mat or floor
(c) Chin touching chest
(d) Begin reaching forward with three (3) successive "sliding"
motion-stretching movements as far forward as pos-
sible until you assume position as illustrated in Poses 3
and 4
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times, trying with each repetition to
reach farther and farther forward as indicated.
CAUTIONS
Pose 4—Continue EXHALING SLOWLY, abdomen "drawn" in, chin pressed firmly
against chest.
35

IX
Rocker With
Open Legs

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) Bend knees
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
Pose 3 (a) Grasp ankles firmly
(b) Toes (pointed) forward and downward (knees locked)
(c) Spread legs upward and outward as far as possible
(d) Keep abdomen "drawn" in as far as possible with
(e) Chin touching chest
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) "Roll" over backward trying to touch mat or floor with
toes
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing "rocking" exercise backward and forward six (6) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Arms and legs rigid (elbows and knees locked). "Pivot" on base of spine,
"rocking" backward to Pose 4 position, then "rock" forward, pressing head
firmly against chest, at the same time pressing arms firmly forward against legs
until you reach Pose 3 and try to balance yourself in that position.
37

X
The Cork-Screw

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1
Pose 2
Pose 3
Pose 4
Pose 3
Pose 4
a) Take position illustrated
b) Entire spine must rest on floor or mat
c) Arms straight forward touching body
d) Palms down
a) INHALE SLOWLY
b) Raise legs (close together) "rolling" upward until
c) Body rests on shoulders, arms and head
d) Knees locked
e) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
a) EXHALE SLOWLY
b) Lower both legs (close together) but not touching mat or
floor
c) Knees locked
d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
e) Twist trunk "corkscrew" fashion until
f) Body is partially lowered on right side to mat or floor
(a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Make a complete right-to-left circle upward as far as
possible and
(c) Return to Pose 2 position
(a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Lower both legs (close together) but not touching mat or
floor
(c) Knees locked
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(e) Twist trunk "corkscrew" fashion until
(f) Body is partially lowered on left side to mat or floor
(a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Make a complete left-to-right circle upward as far as pos-
sible and
(c) Return to Pose 2 position
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times each.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—While "circling" keep both shoulders pressed to mat or floor. Arms
straight.
Pose 4—While "circling" keep both shoulders pressed to mat or floor. Arms
straight.
REMARKS
This exercise strengthens neck and shoulders and is an internal and spinal massage.
39

XI
The Saw

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position as illustrated
(b) Spread legs as wide apart as possible
(c) Head up
(d) Chin "drawn" in
(e) Chest out
(f) Abdomen "drawn" in
(g) Arms (shoulder-high) pressed backward until shoulder
blades lock
(h) INHALE SLOWLY
Pose 2 (a) Twist body (from trunk only) to right as far as possible
Pose 3 (a) Bend forward and downward as far as possible until
(b) Left hand crosses and rests diagonally and centrally on
right foot
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(d) Stretching body forward in three (3) successive sliding-
reaching "saw-like" motions as far as possible
Pose 4 (a) Resume position illustrated in this pose
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
Pose 2 (a) Twist body (from trunk only) to left as far as possible
Pose 3 (a) Bend forward and downward as far as possible until
right hand crosses and rests diagonally and centrally
on left foot
(b) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(c) Stretching body forward in three (3) successive sliding-
reaching "saw-like" motions as far as possible.
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times each.
NOTE
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Twist body before bending forward as in Pose 3.
Pose 3—Lift raised arm backward and upward as high as possible as indicated
in this pose.
41

XII
The Swan-Dive
;

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 and Pose 2 Take position illustrated
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Head raised upward and backward as far as possible
(c) Chest raised high from mat or floor
(d) Raise arms upward and sideward in line with locked
shoulders
(e) Turn palms upward (right to left)
(f) Legs (close together) stretched and raised off mat or floor
(g) Toes (pointed) forward and downward (knees locked)
(h) Body rigid
(i) Back locked
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY as you "rock" forward
(b) INHALE SLOWLY as you "rock" upward
Repeat the foregoing "rocking" exercise six (6) times.
NOTE
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Keep back locked, legs off mat or floor, head back, arms rigid, shoul-
ders locked.
43

XIII
The One Leg Kick

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1
Pose 2
Pose 3
Pose 4
a) Take position illustrated
b) Lie flat with head resting on arms
c) Stretch legs (close together) straight backward
d) Knees locked
e) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
a) Lie on abdomen
b) Head up
c) Raise chest above mat or floor
d) Stretch arms forward to rightangle position
e) Rest clenched fists on mat or floor
f) Stretch legs (close together) straight backward
g) Keep knees locked
h) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
a) INHALE SLOWLY and
b) Raise legs about 2" above mat or floor
c) Try to snap-kick heel of right leg to buttocks
a) EXHALE SLOWLY while
b) Stretching right leg backward and with
c) Heel of left leg
d) Try to snap-kick heel of left leg to buttocks
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times—right and left.
Pose 2—Head up. Chest above mat or floor.
Pose 3—Keep toes (pointed) above mat or floor.
NOTE
CAUTIONS
45

XIV
The Double Kick

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Arms stretched backward
(c) Firmly pressed to sides of body
(d) Fists clenched
(e) Face down and
(f) Chin touching mat or floor
(g) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(h) Knees locked
Pose 2 (a) Rest chin on mat or floor
(b) Fold arms backward
(c) Grasp fingers of left hand with right hand
(d) Stretch legs (close together) straight backward
(e) Knees locked
(f) Toes (pointed) backward and downward and
(g) Raised about 1" above mat or floor
Pose 3 (a) Raise legs forward to rightangle position
Pose 4 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Thrust chest out with head thrown back as far as possible
and at the same time
(c) Raise arms (locked) from body
(d) Stretch backward (tensed) as far as possible, then
(e) Snap-kick legs (tensed) straight backward and
(f) Raised as high as possible from mat or floor
NOTE
Repeat foregoing exercise five (5) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 4—Keep head up as high as possible. Keep arms stretched backward as
far as possible without touching body.
47

XV
The Neck Pull

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
(c) Clasp hands (fingers firmly interlocked) behind head
(d) Toes (pointed) up and backward
Pose 2 (a) Bend head forward, chin touching chest
(b) Abdomen "drawn" in
(c) Toes (poinded) upward
(d) Spine "bowed" forward off mat or floor
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Tense and press legs firmly downward against mat or
floor
(c) Slowly raise body upward and forward to position as
indicated
(d) Toes (pointed) upward
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Bend body forward until head and knees meet, if possi-
ble, as illustrated
(c) Keep elbows straight backward until shoulder blades lock
(d) INHALE SLOWLY while
(e) Returning to Pose 3 position
(f) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(g) Returning to Poses 2 and 1 positions
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times.
NOTE
CAUTIONS
Pose 1—Keep toes (pointed) upward.
Pose 2—Keep legs pressed firmly to mat or floor (if necessary, placing cushion on
feet).
Pose 4—Elbows straight backward until shoulder blades lock.
49

V.
v.
/
s
x>
■r
c/stor,

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) Bring legs upward until
(b) Your body rests on head, shoulders, upper arms, neck
and elbows, then with
(c) "Cupped" hands supporting hips
(d) INHALE SLOWLY
Pose 3 (a) "Split" legs scissors-like (left leg backward; right leg for-
ward)
(b) Legs stretched (knees locked)
(c) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Alternate "split" legs scissors-like (right leg backward;
left leg forward)
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing scissors-like exercise six (6) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Keep body rigid, move legs only, knees locked, toes (pointed) forward
and downward. Try gradually to execute "split" so that toes of forward leg, in
alternating movements, are beyond your vision; and backward leg, in alter-
nating movements, likewise.
51

XVII
The Bicycle

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) Raise body on arms, elbows, shoulders, neck, and head
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
(c) "Split" legs (Pose 3)
Pose 3 (a) Bend right knee downward and backward and try to
"kick" yourself
(b) EXHALE SLOWLY
Pose 4 (a) "Pull" right leg straight backward
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
(c) Bend left knee downward and backward and try to "kick"
yourself
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing "kicking" exercise five (5)-times with each leg.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Be sure to assume position as nearly as possible to that illustrated in this
pose. Stretch each leg alternately forward beyond your vision with knee locked,
toes (pointed) forward and downward.
53

XVIII
The Shoulder
Bridge

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) Raise body on upper arms, elbows, shoulders, neck, head,
with both feet flat on mat or floor
(b) Grasp waist firmly with both hands as illustrated
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Raise right leg forward and upward to upright position
(c) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Lower right leg forward and downward without bending
knee and with knee locked
(c) Thrust chest upward and outward as far as possible as
illustrated in this pose
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Raise left leg forward and upward to upright position
(c) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Lower left leg forward and downward without bending
knee and with knee locked
(c) Thrust chest upward and outward as far as possible as
illustrated in this pose
NOTE
Repeat left leg and right leg movements three (3) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Toes pointed, knee locked right leg. Press foot firmly downward on mat
or floor as each leg is lowered and chest thrust out.
55

XIX
The Spine Twist

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
(c) Sit perfectly upright in right angle position
(d) Chest out
(e) Abdomen "drawn" in
(f) Head up
(g) Arms (shoulder-wide, palms down) stretched backward
until shoulder blades lock
(h) Legs (close together) resting full length on mat or floor
(i) Toes (pointed) upward and backward
Pose 2 (a) Keeping arms and legs absolutely rigid
(b) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(c) Twisting body and turning head to right as far as pos-
sible, then with two (2) further supreme mental and
physical efforts, strive to bette/.. your original first
attempt
(d) INHALE SLOWLY while
(e) Returning to position in
Pose 3 (a) Illustration
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(b) Twisting body and turning head to left as far as possible,
then with two (2) further supreme mental and physical
efforts, strive to better your original first attempt
(c) INHALE SLOWLY while
(d) Returning to position in
Pose 3 (a) Illustration
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times left and three (3) times right, trying
with each repetition to reach farther and farther backward.
CAUTIONS
Pose 1—Keep arms and legs absolutely rigid. Shoulder blades locked. Twist body
from spine only. Try to touch chin alternately to right and left shoulder.
57

XX
The Jack-Knife

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Rest entire spine on mat or floor
Pose 2 (a) Stretch arms sidewise
(b) Both legs (close together) raised upward to right angle
position
(c) Knees locked
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(e) INHALE SLOWLY
Pose 3 (a) Press arms firmly downward against mat or floor
(b) With knees locked "roll" body over until
(c) Spine is raised off mat or floor (about 5")
Pose 4 (a) "Kick" legs in snappy "jack-knife" fashion straight up-
ward until
(b) Entire body rests on head, neck, shoulders, arms
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY
(d) Return to Pose 3 position
(e) INHALE SLOWLY and then
(f) Return to Pose 2 position
(g) EXHALE SLOWLY
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Keep legs in right angle position, knees locked, toes pointed.
Pose 3—Hold Pose 3 position for mental count of 2.
Pose 4—Hold Pose 4 position for mental count of 2.
59

XXI
The Side Kick

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Lock hands behind head
(c) Head up
(d) Eyes straight forward
(e) Arms straight in line with shoulders
(f) Lie full length right side on mat or floor
Pose 2 (a) Bring legs (close together) forward about 2 feet
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) "Swing" left leg forward as far as possible to you
(c) Return left leg about 1 foot backward and
(d) "Swing" left leg forward to you again and attempt to
better your first trial
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY, turn around and
(b) "Swing" right leg forward as far as possible to you
(c) Return right leg about 1 foot backward and
(d) "Swing" right leg forward to you again and attempt to
better your first trial
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) "Swing" right leg backward as far as possible
(c) Return right leg about 1 foot forward and
(d) "Swing" right leg backward again and attempt to better
your first trial
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times, left and right.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3 —Head up, elbows back. Keep entire body rigid. Move "free" leg only.
Keep other leg in straight line pressed against mat or floor.
Pose 4—Maintain balance lying on side of body.
61

XXII
The Teaser

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Head up
(c) Legs (close together)
(d) Knees locked
(e) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(f) Arms at right angle position beside body
(g) Hands pointed straight forward
Pose 2 (a) Bend head forward
(b) Chin to chest
(c) Press abdomen in
(d) "Roll" backward on spine until
(e) Legs are raised upward to indicated angle
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Raise arms in parallel line with legs as indicated
Pose 4 (a) "Roll" forward and upward
(b) "Pivot" on rump keeping
(c) Raised arms in line with raised legs as indicated (parallel)
(d) EXHALE SLOWLY and
(e) Return to Pose 2 position and
(f) INHALE SLOWLY
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Arms and legs must be kept in straight parallel lines. Keep back well
rounded. Chest pressed in.
63

XXIII
The Hip Twist With
Stretched Arms

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Put arms in rightangle position
(c) Firmly pressed to mat or floor with
(d) Palms of hands in backward position
(e) Keep legs (close together) straight forward
(f) Keep toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Swing legs (close together)
(c) Knees lock
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(e) As high as possible
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY on downward
(b) "Swing" without legs touching mat or floor
Pose 4 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) "Swing" legs upward as high as possible in righthand
circle
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY and start to
(d) "Swing" legs downward in lefthand circle as far as
possible
(e) Without legs touching mat or floor
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times in succession—three (3) times for
left circle, and three (3) times for righthand circle leg "swing" movements.
CAUTIONS
Pose 1—Press chest inward as far as possible.
Pose 2—Chin down.
Pose 4—When "circling" upward "swing" legs as high and as close to head as
possible. Be sure only legs and hips are moved.
65

xxiV
Swimming

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
and 2 (b) Arms stretched forward
(c) Palms down
(d) Head upward and backward as far as possible
(e) Chest raised off mat or floor
(f) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(g) Knees locked
(h) INHA1E and EXHALE normally while performing the
simultaneous, alternating, compound motions in the
following movements, counting mentally from 1 to 10,
beginning with right arm movement
Pose 3 (a) Left leg and right arm raised upward as far as possible
and simultaneously reverse to
Pose 4 (a) Right leg and left arm position and follow instructions
under (h) in 2 above
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise as indicated in the preceding instructions.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Left leg and right arm raised as high as possible in upward movements.
Left leg and right arm must not touch mat or floor in downward movements.
Right leg and left arm raised as high as possible in upward movements. Right
leg and left arm must not touch mat or floor in downward movements. Keep
body rigid. Move arms and legs only.
67

XXVI
The Leg-Pull

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Arms (shoulder-wide) in right angle position
(c) Hands at right angles
(d) Head in straight line with body
(e) Legs close together
(f) Toes pointed downward
(g) Heels close together
(h) Knees locked
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Raise right leg upward and backward as high as possible
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY
(d) Lower right leg to Pose 1 position
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Raise left leg upward and backward as high as possible
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY
(d) Lower left leg to Pose 1 position
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing leg exercise three (3) times, right and left.
CAUTIONS
Pom 1—Arms must be shoulder-wide in right angle position.
Pose 2—Move legs only, knees locked.
Pose 3—Move legs only, knees locked.
71

XXVII
The Side Kick
Kneeling

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) Kneel on left knee and
(b) Support body on left arm, then
(c) Stretch right leg (knee locked) out sidewise in straight
line with body
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward, then
(e) Bring right arm backward with hand supporting head,
elbow back as far as possible, then
Pose 3 (a) INHALE QUICKLY while
(b) "Swinging" right leg backward forcibly as far as possible,
then
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE QUICKLY while
(b) "Swinging" right leg forward forcibly as far as possible
Pose 2 (a) Kneel on right knee and
(b) Support body on right arm, then
(c) Stretch left leg (knee locked) out sidewise in straight line
with body with
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward, then
(e) Bring left arm and elbow backward as far as possible
with hand supporting head, then
Pose 3 (a) INHALE QUICKLY while
(b) "Swinging" left leg backward forcibly as far as possible,
then
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE QUICKLY while
(b) "Swinging" left leg backward forcibly as far as possible
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise four times with each leg.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Keep head up, elbow back, chest out and abdomen in. Keep body rigid;
move legs only. INHALE QUICKLY when swinging legs forcibly forward. EX-
HALE QUICKLY when swinging legs forcibly backward.
REMARKS
Concentrating on waistline and hips, also exercise for balance and coordination.
73

XXVIII
The Side Bend

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose
Pose
Pose 3
Pose 2
Pose 3
a) Take position illustrated
a) Keep right arm in line with right shoulder
b) Left arm flat against body
c) Head up
d) Chin "drawn" in
e) Eyes straight forward
f) INHALE SLOWLY
a) Turn head left and try to rest chin on left shoulder
b) Lower body until right calf touches mat or floor
c) EXHALE SLOWLY
d) Return to Pose 2 position
e) INHALE SLOWLY
a) Keep left arm in line with left shoulder
b) Right arm flat against body
c) Head up
d) Chin "drawn" in
e) Eyes straight forward
f) INHALE SLOWLY
a) Turn head right and try to rest chin on right shoulder
b) Lower body until left calf touches mat or floor
c) EXHALE SLOWLY
d) Return to Pose 2 position
e) INHALE SLOWLY
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times, right and left.
NOTE
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Keep body rigid, head up, chest out, abdomen "drawn" in.
Pose 3—Only left and right calf respectively should touch mat when lowered.
REMARKS
This exercise concentrates on arm, shoulder and wrist muscles, stretches hip and
waistline, and develops balance and coordination. In a month, change from
Pose 2 position to Pose 4.
75

XXIX
The Boomerang

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
(c) Sit up straight in right angle position
(d) Head up
(e) Abdomen "drawn" in
(f) Cross left leg over right leg
(g) Arms pressed against body
(h) Hands pointed forward and pressed against mat or floor
Pose 2 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(b) "Rolling" backward as far as possible and while in this
position
(c) Cross right leg over left leg and
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY while
(b) "Rolling" forward and
(c) "Swing" arms backward as far as possible
Pose 4 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY while bringing both
(b) Legs to mat or floor with
(c) Head touching knees with
(d) Arms (palms up) raised backward as far as possible and
upward and
(e) Return to Pose 2 position
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times, first starting with right leg crossed
over left leg and then crossing left leg over right leg alternately.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Keep arms and shoulders pressed firmly against mat or floor. Reverse legs
while in "overhead" position when returning to Pose 3 position.
Pose 4—Try to touch head to knees. Keep arms (palms up) stretched straight
backward and upward as far as possible.
77

XXX
The Seal

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Bend head forward to chest
(c) Abdomen pressed in
(d) Legs apart "spread-eagle" fashion
(e) Soles and heels together, pointed inward
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Twine both arms "grape-vine" fashion under both legs
(c) Passing left arm under and over left leg
(d) Grasping left instep in locked grip
(e) Passing right arm under and over right leg
(f) Grasping right instep in locked grip
(g) Press soles and heels firmly close together, pointed
inward
Pose 4 (a) INHALE SLOWLY while
(b) "Rolling" backward as far as possible
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY
(d) Return to Pose 3 position
(e) "Clap" (hand-fashion) soles and heels together, twice
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Bend body forward. Press chest in. Tilt body backward to raise legs off
mat or floor.
Pose 3—"Pivot" body on rump in "rolling" backward and forward. You INHALE
while "rolling" backward.
Pose 4—Press head firmly to mat or floor in "rolling" upward. You EXHALE
while "rolling" upward.
79

XXXI
The Crab

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) INHALE SLOWLY
Pose 2 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Cross legs Indian-fashion
(c) Head bent forward
(d) Chin to chest
(e) Abdomen pressed in
(f) Grasp both feet firmly
(g) Right hand grasping left foot
(h) Left hand grasping right foot
(i) "Pull" both knees toward shoulders as far as possible
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY while
(b) "Rolling" backward as far as possible
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY while
(d) "Rolling" upward until
Pose 4 (a) Head rests on mat or floor
(b) INHALE SLOWLY until you return to Pose 3 position
(c) EXHALE SLOWLY while again "rolling" upward until
(d) Head rests on mat or floor as indicated in Pose 4
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Hold head as closely as possible to chest. Press abdomen in. "Round"
back. "Poll" knees to shoulders as nearly as possible. "Pivot" on rump.
81

XXXII
The Rocking

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Rest body (face downward) on mat or floor
(c) Press arms to sides with palms upward
(d) Stretch legs (close together) backward
(e) Keep toes (pointed) forward and downward
Pose 2 (a) Bend legs forward toward head
(b) Grasp feet
Pose 3 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) Thrust chest out with head thrown back as far as possible
(c) Stretch legs (close together) toward mat or floor
Pose 4 (a) Rock forward until chin touches mat or floor
(b) Rock backward as far as possible
(c) INHALE SLOWLY as you
(d) Rock forward and
(e) EXHALE SLOWLY as you
(f) Rock backward
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise five (5) times.
CAUTION
Pose 2—Keep head thrown back as far as possible.
83

XXXIII
The Control
Balance
4

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) Rest entire body on mat or floor
(c) Legs (close together) straight forward
(d) Toes (pointed) forward and downward
(e) Arms straight forward beside body
(f) Palms down
Pose 2 (a) INHALE SLOWLY
(b) "Roll" over until body rests on shoulders, arms and neck,
and
(c) Right toe touches mat or floor with
(d) Right foot firrnly grasped by both hands and
(e) Left leg held straight upward as high as possible
Pose 3 (a) EXHALE SLOWLY
(b) Release hold of hands on right foot and
(c) Bring left leg downward until
(d) Left toe touches mat or floor and
(e) Grasp left foot firmly with both hands
(f) Right leg held straight upward as high as possible
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise six (6) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 2—Maintain balance on shoulders, arms and neck. Keep knees locked. Toes
(pointed) forward and downward.
85

w . -rfjr
-r
XXXIV
The Push Up

INSTRUCTIONS
Pose 1 (a) Take position illustrated
(b) With arms (shoulder-wide) and palms extended
(c) Try to touch mat or floor
Pose 2 (a) Keep feet pressed firmly on mat or floor
(b) Proceed "to walk" forward on palms of hands
(c) Keep head downward and continue "walking" forward
until
Pose 3 (a) You assume position illustrated in this pose
(b) Keep body rigid and in a straight line from head to heels
(c) Raise weight of body on toes and palms with
(d) Arms (shoulder-wide) and hands pointed straight for-
ward
(e) Keep head in straight line with body
Pose 4 (a) Keep body rigid
(b) Back locked
(c) Bend arms (shoulder-wide) at elbows with
(d) Upper arms pressed firmly to body
(e) INHALE SLOWLY
(f) Lower body until chin touches mat or floor
(g) Stretch neck straight outward as far as possible
(h) Hips locked
(i) Abdomen "drawn" in
(j) Chest raised above mat or floor
(k) EXHALE SLOWLY
(I) Raise body slowly by
(m) Pressing hands firmly against mat or floor
NOTE
Repeat the foregoing exercise three (3) times.
CAUTIONS
Pose 3—Keep shoulders in straight line with hands. Hips locked. Head in straight
line with body. Keep body absolutely rigid. Move arms only (not body). Touch
chin (not chest) to mat or floor.
87

